November the 4th, and I am talking to Dr. Chris.
Today is November the 4th. I'm visiting with Dr.
Chris Borman, who's the associate dean for the
College of Education and has been at Texas A&M
since 1960? 1970. 1970, which was a year after the
College of Education became a college. And Chris,
one of the things that I think I would like your
perceptions on, and again, It's strictly your own
feelings and where you've been, and you've been
department head, professor, and now as dean.
You've seen this college evolve from the very
beginning, and you've seen a lot of changes. And
what I would like is how you have perceived these
changes. What were the things that affected it or
impacted the tremendous growth of the College of
Education since your arrival in 1970? Let's see.
I don't know. These aren't in order of importance.
I would say the first thing is the university in
1970, everybody knows this, but it was probably
about 13,000 students. And I don't think anybody,
certainly I didn't have the idea that I was taking a
position at a university that was going to grow so
rapidly. And this was the first college position,
the only college position I've had. Who recruited
you? Art Roach, Dr. Arthur Roach, who was at the
time head of the Department of Educational
Psychology. And he recruited me. He had gone to a
summer seminar at Indiana University that was
being led by my chair up there. They were looking
for somebody who had experience in vocational
education and was in counseling, because they had
a grant from the Texas Education Agency to train
vocational counselors. So they needed somebody
who had this background in vocational education,
and I had worked at a vocational high school in
Hammond, Indiana for a lot of years, so I had that
experience. He started calling around and he
called my chair at Indiana and he told me about it.
The thing that's kind of interesting I think is
about two or three months, a couple months ahead of
that, I'd been at the APGA, which is the National
Counselors Association meeting in New Orleans
and they have a job bank or interview type thing and
I had just really worked real hard and had maybe 13
to 15 interviews and met all these different
people and Dr. Roach and several faculty members
were there interviewing for this job and I never
met them at all. And then I get back to Indiana and he
calls me so I came down here. But anyway, I would say
that the tremendous growth of the university, I
certainly didn't have any idea that the
university that I was taking a job at would go The
other thing that's kind of interesting is the job
that I took was a one-year temporary job, and I'm
still there. Was it soft money? It was soft money.
It was soft money. They had a grant from the Texas
Education Agency, and it was soft money. And they
couldn't guarantee absolutely, but Dean Hubert
told me, he said that he would pretty much give his
word that they would make it a permanent position,
which they did the next year. But so that... Was
there very much going on with soft money at the
time? Because I have heard that, you know, he
really preferred not to put too much emphasis on
soft money type programs. He wanted to have the
hard... Well, I think he wanted to have the hard
line position, but he was very much in favor of
getting external funding. Okay. And he,
especially at that time, vocational education
money was, there was quite a bit of money available
during the 70s and... Mm-hmm. this money was a part
of it. So he was very interested in doing that. But
he did give me his word that he would try to make it a
permanent position next year. And you came into
the Department of Educational Psychology, which
is where you still are teaching. Right, right. So
the size, the way the university grew. I guess the
other thing that really amazed me is the way the
physical appearance of the university has
changed. I mean, you know, just the buildings and
size and everything. We were, you know, my first
office was up on the fourth floor of Academic, and
we had these big wooden bookcases. I mean, it was a
classroom that was made into a series of offices,
and just bookcases divided us, you know. We moved
around several times. We moved over then to Bolton
Hall and had offices up there on the second or third
floor. And Harrington was a parking lot for
academic at that time. And so it was really
exciting when they started building Harrington
and then I think we moved in in what, 72 or 73,
something like that. The physical appearance,
not that I didn't think it was an attractive
campus, but they had really changed it. Was there a
lot of resistance? I was looking at some yearbooks
that had pictures and some complaints and
demonstrations by students because they were
putting in so much concrete and taking off some of
the trees and some of this. A&M has really strived
to keep the campus, the aesthetic. I think they
have done a pretty good job of doing that. In fact, I
think they've improved it a lot. But there was a
time there during the 70s, 71, 72, where they just
tore up the walks and everything, and you couldn't
even, you know, there wasn't any place to walk. I
remember we were in Bolton, and they just tore up
one afternoon, they just tore up the sidewalk all
the way, and there was just a trench there. And as
long as it was dry, but then when it rained, it was
just, I mean, it was horrible. You couldn't even
get up to the steps to get up to the, you know, and
they didn't seem to have a whole lot of concern for
that, you know, they just, just kinda but what
they've done I think the other thing that happened
to is when I got there I came there for an interview
like on a Friday I arrived on a Thursday night and I
was there just for Friday and then I went back
Friday evening so it was a real quick trip and
between that time and the time that I accepted the
job and I I started then in the first of June
teaching summer school. And my family was still in
Indiana because we had a cellar house and all that.
So it was about six weeks before they moved in. I
started teaching summer school. And at that time
is when General Rudder had died. President Rudder
had died. So I never was on campus. I think he was ill
in the hospital at the time I was there being
interviewed. He died in March, I believe. Oh, had
he died in March? Well, no way. Well, he either had
died or died in that interim right there. But
anyway, then General Ludeke was acting president
for a year or so. But I think another thing that is
just my perception, and I think it had a
significant impact on the college and on the
university, was bringing Jack Williams in. Lots
and lots of changes occurred. during his 70s. And I
think his leadership style and the way he did it is
he didn't irritate. You were talking about people
being upset because they were tearing up the
campus and changing things. There are a lot of
significant changes. I mean, if you look at what's
happened at A&M just since 1970, lots and lots of
changes and it certainly could have upset a lot of
former students, but I don't think there was a
whole lot of that. I may be naive about this and
wasn't in on, you know, all the feelings there, but
I think his leadership style and what happened, he
was the right man for the time.
I think also having a background in history and
coming from a different background, he added a
flavor to the university that we needed. Also,
it's my perception that he was extremely well
liked by the faculty. The faculty had lots of
respect for him. So I think that's a significant
thing. So you have worked then under Williams as
president. You did not have any experience with
Rutter. Miller and now Vanderbilt. I have not
really, we have not discussed presidents with any
of the other interviews, but that is definitely a
part of the external environment, which I will be
looking at. So this is good to get these
perceptions about the leadership in the
university, because I've been focusing on the
leadership in the college, but it's important to
get this feeling of what was going on outside of the
College of Education. And if you can expand that
then to the other two administrations. I would say
just if I looked at all the administrations, I
would rate his as number one. I mean, maybe I
shouldn't do that, but I would say I was really
impressed with his leadership style and the
growth and the way he handled it and some of the
people that he had around him and
everything. I would say that he probably had the
most respect of any of the, not that the other ones
didn't have as much respect. Miller wasn't in
there long enough to really get an impact. He was
more, a more traditional approach to, and I think
that was quite a contrast between Williams and
what had gone on before. I didn't have a And Miller
was an A&M graduate. Do you think that had any
effect? Oh, yeah, I think it did. I think it had an
effect in that he was a background in agriculture,
ag economics, and so on. I don't think there's
anything wrong with supporting all the
traditions and being real strong with that, but I
think that in terms of being a broad university, I
think that What has been the impact, do you think,
of Vander? He has been here now for... Well, I think
five or maybe six years. It was in 81, I guess. Yeah,
okay. Well, he had a couple, their initial first
couple years were pretty rocky, I think. And I've
been impressed with him. Not that I've met him and
interacted with him that often. But I have
interacted with him. And I'm impressed with him.
He's a brilliant person. And he makes a real good
impression for the community or wherever. I mean,
he's quite a scholar. And he's an interesting
person. I don't think he has a contact with the
faculty that, let's say, Jack Williams did. What
about, what has he done, in your opinion, to help
the College of Education? Is there anything
specific that has happened in the College of
Education because of his leadership? Well, I
think that there are a number of things. For one
thing, and this is university-wide, but I think
it's had quite an impact. I would say probably one
of the biggest things then, and as I think about it
now, maybe he's had more contact or impact with the
faculty Maybe I want to retract that statement.
But he, under his administration, he formed the
Faculty Senate. And there's a lot more faculty
involvement, a lot more of a democratic process,
and a lot more input from faculty. And I would say
that's a very strong, very strong point. Is the
faculty as a whole was very receptive to this
title? Oh, yeah. Yeah. I think so. Do they have
these kinds of things in most universities, these
faculty centers or faculty input? Yes, yes. And
A&M was, you know, more, I guess, because of its
military background and the way it's emerged,
especially since it's become so large just in the
more recent years. What is the size of the faculty
now? I'd say it's probably around 2,000. I think
that's just a rough estimate. What is the total
faculty in the College of Education? Well, I'd say
about 150, probably about 110 regular faculty
positions, but probably when you count sophomore
positions and everything else. Okay. So we talked
then a little bit about the things that have
affected change. To what extent do you feel that
the college, because the mission of the College of
Education is the same as it is for the university or
the land grant institution, which is teaching and
research and service, Under the two
administrations in the College of Education, has
there been a shift in emphasis between these
three, or have they been given equal
priority or whatever? What is your feeling on
those? I don't see a major shift
there. I don't think that we're as, and probably
you would find this with a lot of colleges of
education, we're strong on research as let's say a
college of science or some of the other colleges. I
mean there isn't, it's important and people are
expected to do research but I would also, you know
some places there's such a strong emphasis on
research and even though they say teaching is
important it doesn't get as much emphasis. And I
would say it's probably more equal in our college.
And I have not really seen a big change between the
Hubert administration or the Corrigan
administration in terms of emphasis. Would you
rate, is it a one, two, three on teaching,
research, and service in that order, possibly? Or
would it one and two be together, the teaching and
the research? I think that they want strong
teachers. But I don't think that in terms of tenure
and promotion, that you're today going to be
tenuring or promoting somebody if it's just
strictly teaching. You've got to be doing some
research, too. All right. What about you have
always been, even though you're in the
administrative end of it now, you also have
maintained that contact with students through
your teaching. Has this tremendous growth
affected how you've been able to work with
students? Have your classes changed
dramatically because of these No, I haven't
really found them to change too much because I
don't teach any undergraduate courses, and I
never have. The ed psych department is primarily a
graduate department, and we teach some
undergraduate service courses, but usually I
have not taught those. So the classes haven't, in
terms of science, haven't changed. One thing I
would say, though, that the quality of students
has changed tremendously in terms of graduate
students. Because when we first started our
graduate programs, and this varies from
department to department, but I'm just talking
about Ed's site now. We had some pretty good
students, but we had a lot of local students. And it
wasn't as competitive to get into the department
And I would say in the last five to six years it's
become very, very competitive, especially since
our doctoral program in counseling psychology
has been accredited by the APA. You know, they get
some hundred applications a year and maybe admit
ten people into their doctoral program. And now
they have an APA-accredited school psychology
program, and that's the same way. So the students,
the competitiveness and the quality of the
students has increased quite a bit. Can you share a
little bit about your role as department head? How
many years were you department head? Five years.
For five years. I'm just now starting to interview
the department heads, and I don't know exactly
what What responsibilities does the department
head have versus being a professor, or now that you
are a dean, how would you compare those? Well, I
think that the department heads are responsible
to the dean, but there's a lot of autonomy. The
department head's job, for instance, if you
compare it with my current job, there's a lot of
difference. Because even though you report to the
dean and you're a part of the college, there's
still a lot of autonomy. You develop the budget.
You're responsible for hiring and tenure and
promotion. Even though you have faculty
committees and the dean advising you or working
with you on it, the decisions and responsibility
decisions are the department head's. And I didn't
really realize. Well, I think I did an adequate job
as department head, but I didn't realize how much
was involved in it until I got into it. Do they allow
special compensation? How are department heads
compensated for the extra work? There is not a
special percentage that you get extra for being a
department head. But they usually, in terms of
salary, they usually give you a little bit bigger
raise so that you're one of the better paid people.
Do they adjust your teaching load as well? Oh, yes.
On department head, like I, I would only be
teaching one third time. And that's the same way
with being in the dean's office. Now that you're in
the dean's office and you sort of are looking from a
different window, how do you see Within the
College of Education, the collaborative effort
among departments, you were part of one
department that works evidently with several
others. How much of that goes on in the college,
this collaborative? Not as much as I'd like to say.
Why and what can be done about it? I don't know.
Well, I do know some reasons, I guess. I'm not
saying that there isn't collaboration. There is.
And I think that when Dean Corrigan came, and one of
the things he was very instrumental in getting the
faculty to initiate was the inquiry process. And
that is supposed to be promoting collaboration.
It does promote it to a certain extent. But to me,
there still isn't as much collaboration. And I'm
talking about not just between departments, but
I'm also talking collaboration between faculty
within departments. I think that one of the things
that has caused our faculty to be kind of
independent and on their own is our evaluation
process. I think that... to, in terms of tenure
promotion and salary increase, they're going to
look at your teaching, but they're also going to
look at how many articles you've published and
these kinds of things. And I think that the main
thing the faculty want to do is get their couple
articles out. And I'm being a little trite here,
and I don't mean that. But they want to get some
quick article, do a little research, get some
articles out, and get them published. And as long
as my vita looks fine, that's what I need to do. And I
think faculty do want to do collaboration, but
they want some assurances that they're going to
get adequate credit when it comes to evaluation
each year. And so I'm not saying that there isn't
collaboration, but I think we could do a lot better
than we're doing. And would it require changing
the evaluation process? Oh, yeah, yeah. Is that
even feasible or possible? Yes, I think it's
feasible. I don't see it happening, but I think
it's feasible. One of the comments that one person
made to me was that they would like to see
departments just done away with and have just one
college where you, because there's so much Not
just exactly turf protection, but also the
department has, and being that you were one,
probably you can relate to this, having to fight,
so to speak, for the resources for their
department. And that sort of prevents what you're
just saying, the collaboration, because
everybody has to look out for their own. Yeah, our
colleges, if you look at colleges of education
across the country, is organized in a fairly
traditional way. And what I'm saying about not
being enough collaboration and kind of everybody
doing their own thing is not unusual. It happens. I
mean, when we were working out how to set up this
school-university collaborative
organization, we visited a number of different
universities and major universities, too. And
it's going on at other places, too. Can you tell me a
little bit about the school-university
collaborative? Because I understand that's a
brand new endeavor that is going to have some very
Well, we've been working on this for several
years, and the one person I've been working very
closely with in particular is Jim McNamara. And
what got me involved in this or interested in this
was I was getting feedback from faculty who were
saying, I want to get into the schools to do
research, and it's really difficult to get into
the schools and do research. We need some help. And
one faculty member in Ed Psych gave me a paper that
was presented at an AERA conference on a
collaborative organization they had at the
University of Illinois, how there was an office
and this woman kind of brokered research projects
in the schools and everything. So we started
looking at what we could do and we visited Illinois
and Indiana and some other places like that. What
evolved in a very quick way is that last January,
January of 87, We had a day and a half conference in
the Woodlands. And we selected eight school
districts who we thought would be ideal school
districts to work with. And the other thing, the
other side of the coin is faculty are saying they
want to get into schools and do research. But if you
talk to teachers in the school, there's schools
that are saying, well, I'm not sure if I want to work
with these faculty in the College of Education
because they're not doing research that's
relevant or that's going to have an effect on what
I'm doing in the classroom. So what we want to do is
we want to get faculty and teachers together in the
public schools and develop some joint research
projects and some collaborative, cooperative
type activities to encourage research. And so we
had this conference and we selected eight school
districts. And then we got them, asked them to make
a commitment for the next year to kind of on a
cooperative way, experimental way, to see if we
can develop this organization. And they've
developed a research project now that they're
working on. They're collecting data on dropouts
in all eight districts. And they're trying to
analyze or collect data on the characteristics of
dropouts. The next step then is that that would
lead to intervention strategies and so on. And
we've also come up with a plan for formalizing the
organization. And we're planning a second annual
conference, a school-university collaborative
conference in the Woodlands in January. And we're
going to ask each school district to formally join
the organization. We're also asking these eight
school districts to invite another school
district. And this is going to be known, I think, as
the Texas A&M School-University Collaborative
Research Consortium. I think that's it. So I'm
excited about it. And who picked this particular
area for research? Was it the university, or was it
the schools, or was it done jointly? It was kind of
done jointly, but I would say primarily the
schools. We wanted to do something that was more
action-oriented that they felt that they needed.
These things that you're doing now that you're
talking about are going to influence the
perceptions of how outsiders view the College of
Education, obviously. Not that that's the
ulterior motive that you're doing it, but it will
help. How is that perception right now within the
state for the College of Education from outside
Texas A&M? I would think that it is very good.
When we started in the 70s, we were not one of the
major teacher education institutions in the
state. And I would say today we are recognized as
Either they are one of the major teacher education
institutions in the state. Turning out more
teachers, I think, than almost any other state
institution. And also I think the quality, the
quality of the students we're attracting and the
students that we're turning out. And I try to say
this in an objective way, but I think we're way out
there. And I think also, I think in the state we have
excellent visibility. I think that nationally we
have visibility because of our dean and maybe a few
faculty who are well-known because of the
research or writing that they've done. And I think
that we're also known because of the visibility of
our dean because he's had a lot of national
offices. And he's on the executive committee, the
Holmes group. He has a lot of visibility. And he
came here with having certainly two deanships
before this one. So I think that that's it. I don't
think we have as much visibility as the talent
that's there. I think we have visibility. I think
we have outstanding visibility in the state. I
think we have visibility nationally, but I think
it's just because of a few people. And I think that
we're kind of hiding our talent under a a basket or
something, or whatever you want to say. I think
that we need to get some, and I think this is where I
would talk about collaboration between faculty,
and of course one of my jobs is external funding,
and I guess I'm a little frustrated at times, but I
think that the quality of the people that we have,
that if we could get them to work together a little
bit more, whereas we could get a couple national
research centers here, or some really major
projects, research projects, I think we would
have that visibility. For instance, the
University of Illinois has had the National
Center for Reading that's funded by the US
Department of Education. It's had it there for 10
or 15 years. And I think overall, the quality of the
faculty that we have compared with Illinois is
very comparable. But because they've had this
center and this visibility, I think that that's
made a big difference. And we've got an
outstanding reading faculty at EDCI, and they're
really top people. So anyway. OK.
Probably one of the things that I want to talk about
a little bit is the future and what you see the
College of Education at Texas A&M achieving in
the, say, 21st century, the year 2000. I know there
has been a study about the year 2000.